Coast is on
its biggest expedition ever.
After exploring Britain
and Europe for eight years,
we've hopped hemispheres
to an extraordinary continent.
It's the furthest that Coast
has ever travelled.
We've come to a land
so majestic and so massive,
it's breath-taking.
And makes me wonder,
why I haven't been here before.
But now, I can finally say...
This is Coast Australia.
It's a country,
an island and a continent.
Blessed with over 60,000 kilometres
for us to explore
on our greatest adventure yet.
For some,
this is what Australia is all about.
Fantastic beaches, shimmering sands,
fabulous coral reefs
and exotic marine life.
But that would be a disservice to
this vast and fascinating continent
with the sixth
longest coastline in the world
and a history of humankind
that stretches back
at least 50,000 years.
Australia is 30 times
bigger than Britain.
The Great Barrier Reef alone
is spread over a larger area
than the UK.
The scale is astonishing.
So it's little wonder
most Australians
proudly huddle by the coast,
magnetically drawn by the splendour,
the opportunity and the lifestyle.
Our task is to capture
the dazzling diversity
of this young, modern nation
but ancient land
as we discover the secrets,
the scenery,
and the stories of its people.
With such an epic canvas,
you might ask, where do we start?
From the Kimberley,
the series features stories
in seven other regions.
Darwin and beyond,
the Great Barrier Reef,
The Gold to Sunshine Coast,
Sydney, Victoria,
Tasmania, and the Coral Coast.
I've gathered a team of experts
who will take us
on this exciting journey.
Writer, palaeontologist
and an Australian of the year,
Professor Tim Flannery,
is peerless in his knowledge
of the history and formation
of the continent.
Marine ecologist, Dr Emma Johnston,
a New South Wales
Scientist of the Year,
explores the stunning biodiversity
of Australian waters.
Anthropologist, Dr Xanthe Mallett,
uses her forensic experience
to unravel stories of the past.
Landscape Architect, Brendan Moar,
is passionate about
the geography of the shoreline,
and the folks who call it home.
And Miriam Corowa, journalist
and saltwater woman herself,
investigates the social evolution
of this dynamic coast.
And as for me?
Well, I get the job of a lifetime,
because I get to be your guide
and with 80 percent of Australians
living on the coastline
and so many stories to be told,
I'd better get cracking.
For Coast Australia's
inaugural journey,
we're in one of the world's
last great wilderness areas,
the Kimberley in the north-west
corner of the continent
where the first humans
may have arrived from Asia
a long, long time ago.
There's been
a rich coastal culture, here,
for at least the last 50,000 years.
A way of life
that was once embedded in the rocks
and the land of this coastline.
At the very least,
it's now a repository of knowledge
for those who still live here today.
Best of all for me,
this stretch of coastline
has many places associated
with the dreaming,
and we'll be visiting
a few of them along the way.
Joining me in this episode,
Tim Flannery trips over dinosaurs.
And there
is a pink dinosaur foot.
Xanthe Mallett explores
a unique maritime war grave.
This is a raft.
If we do see a crocodile
or a shark, do we have a safe word?
Brendan Moar takes to water
on an ancient raft.
Emma Johnston dishes up the mud
on migratory shorebirds.
And I investigate
Broome's glittering place in history.
Look at that. It's like Jupiter
compared to the Earth.
This is the Kimberley Coast.
Our journey stretches
from Eighty Mile Beach in the west,
through Broome,
around the Dampier Peninsula
and across the Buccaneer Archipelago
to Freshwater Cove.
The Kimberley region
of Western Australia,
is three times the size of England,
with a population
of just 40,000 souls.
So, with so few people
per square kilometre,
it's one of the most sparsely
populated regions on planet Earth.
And so when it comes
to getting around,
one of these is very useful.
Remote and rugged,
this is a land where time began.
Ancient gorges and deep fjords,
fan out to magnificent bays
dotted with primeval monoliths
endless horizons everywhere.
I have to say, in all my travels,
this is some of the wildest,
most edge-of-the-world-feeling
coastline, I think I've ever seen.
There's also a very
strong feeling from it
that if you were to have been here
200 years ago,
or even 2000 years ago,
it would've looked just the same.
This is a landscape
that dwarfs humanity.
At four billion years,
Australia features some
of the oldest land forms on Earth,
which means an endless
cornucopia of history
for Palaeontologist, Tim Flannery,
who's stepping back in time
to walk with dinosaurs.
Do you know what's
really special about this place?
A hundred million years ago
when these rocks were laid down,
India was just over there.
I'm walking along
what's known as the Dinosaur Coast
on the Dampier Peninsula,
just north of Broome.
Palaeontologists have recorded
at least 15 types of dinosaur
that roamed this area,
leaving literally
thousands of tracks and trackways.
I'm really lucky to get to see these,
because they're only exposed
at a very low tide,
for a few hours,
for a very few days every year.
Dr Steve Salisbury
is a palaeontologist
with a special interest
in the biomechanics of dinosaurs
how they're shaped and move.
- So what have we got here?
- Dinosaur footprint.
I've walked over hundreds
of those coming to meet you.
- You probably have.
- So, Steve, I think I can see,
maybe some toes here, is that--
Am I looking at it right?
Yeah, so it's a three-toe track.
So there's one, two, three.
That's the back of the footprint,
so he's headed that way.
So what would this dinosaur
look like you reckon?
Well, the reason
we're interested in this one
is because this looks like tracks
that in Spain and Portugal,
and then also North America,
have been attributed to Stegosaurs.
Right.
So Stegosaurs are the guys
with the big plates on the back.
That's right.
With the help of traditional
custodian, Richard Hunter,
and research assistant, Nigel Clarke,
Steve is going to make
a silicon cast of the footprint
for further museum studies.
So, Steve, how did these
tracks form? And why right here?
Well, 130 million years ago,
this was part of a big floodplain
heading out probably into a delta.
Back then, Australia was still
part of the Gondwana supercontinent
that included South America,
Africa and India
Here, periodic floods
would have deposited
layers of mud on the sandbars
that made up the floodplain,
which was bordered by dense forests
of cycads and ferns.
Dinosaurs roamed the boggy terrain
leaving their imprints everywhere.
Usually, the muddy prints
would have dried up and crumbled away
but on the Dinosaur Coast,
blankets of sand covered them
and preserved them,
a fossilised landscape.
So, for instance, here,
this bigger one,
you can see this is his big toe,
that's the second toe, and then
the third, fourth and the fifth,
and then there's the small track
of a bipedal ornithopod dinosaur
that's overprinted it.
So, Sauropod.
Great, big long neck, long tail,
one of the classic dinosaurs.
Yeah, yeah. Brachiosaurus
or Diplodocus that kind of thing.
Footprints form all the time.
We left a trail of them on the beach
when we walked down here,
but rarely do they get preserved
in the fossil record.
It's an incredible diversity
of dinosaurs.
Like there's not really
anywhere else in the world
that has such a level of diversity
represented by tracks.
Comes away quite cleanly,
doesn't it?
Yeah.
And there
is a pink dinosaur foot...
...of all things!
Today's science teaches us
about our geophysical beginnings
but there's a much older account
that emanates
from the coast's
indigenous Goolarabooroo people.
Richard has a fascinating
and very different reading
of these ancient tracks...
...a Dreamtime story of Emu Man.
The first ancestral spirit
that walked the Earth
So, what's the name of that Emu Man?
- Marella. Okay. Yeah.
- Marella, yeah.
And did he bring something
to the land when he came?
To Richard and his people,
Marella gave the knowledge
through songs,
which are akin to oral heritage maps.
Laws to sustain balance
and well-being of the land
and its people,
and passed
down through the generations.
You know, plenty of Australia's
coastline's spectacular,
but there's nothing like this.
Price's Point is just unique
because it brings together
Aboriginal Australia
and European Australia
in a way that no other place
on the continent does.
It's the origin of the Dreamtime
for Aboriginal people
across a great swathe
of the continent,
and for European people,
it's an incredible repository
of ancient knowledge,
a vanished world.
The Kimberley weathers
two distinct seasons
a searing dry and the surging wet...
which floods the rivers and bays
that divide the rugged plateaus.
It's a dramatic wilderness
sculpted by time, pressure and water.
The Kimberley region
has the greatest tidal range
in the whole
of the southern hemisphere.
And the second highest
in the entire world.
The 12-metre tidal change, here,
is magnified
by the shape of the coast.
The currents increase considerably to
squeeze huge volumes of tidal water
in and out of the bays and rivers
through narrow gaps.
I'm going to discover how
this stunning coastline was formed
with the help
of a quick geology lesson
and then,
wrestle with that surging tide
at one of the greatest
natural wonders of the Kimberley,
the Horizontal Waterfalls
in Talbot Bay.
All right. Thank you.
Geologist, Dr lan Tyler,
has written the book
on this serene emerald setting.
- This is an interesting spot.
- It is indeed.
This sandbox shows
how two continental masses collided
to create this stunning
billion-year-old vista.
We're compressing five million years
probably into several minutes.
The Horizontal Falls
are in this bit of the model.
The creation of folds and thrusts,
that make up the crumpled geology
of Talbot Bay.
When that was buckled like a rug
pushed up by an opening door,
that was solid?
It wasn't... It's not
pushing in sand. It's folding rock.
It was old enough to be
solid rock when that happened.
So, the pressure is enough
and is held for a long enough time
that it starts to flow like toffee.
Right, now that I've had
my geology lesson,
it's time to see
the Horizontal Falls up close.
Hi there.
Right, so tell me, Adrian,
what's happening here?
Well, basically it's what
you call a tidal pinch.
The tide's actually rising faster
in this bay than it is
in the next bay over.
The gaps are pinching
how much water
it'll let through
so we actually go downhill.
I think it's risen today about
nine metres in the last six hours,
at one hell of a lot of water moving
through there at the moment.
It peaks at about a million litres
in a second.
The reason it can do that
is it's not a normal rapid.
It's not say fast water going
over the top of shallow rocks
it's extremely deep,
50 metres of water underneath it.
- So, it's like--
- 50 metres deep!
50 metres deep, so it's like a column
of water powering through there.
Time to run the first gauntlet
the 20-metre seaward facing gap.
That was relatively sedate.
And now, onto a smaller
more powerful boat
and the narrower ten-metre gap.
The water speed
we're doing at the moment,
about 30 kilometres an hour
just sitting holding the boat
here still.
The sounder's reading 44 metres.
- So it's about 150 feet of water
- Yeah, underneath us, yeah.
- And we should be moving forward
- Yeah, yep.
- At 30 kilometres.
- Yeah.
I've got the boat, you know,
probably 600 horse power,
third throttle
just holding us still here.
It's like an ocean trying
to get through a letterbox.
- Isn't it?
- Yeah, absolutely.
I was a little bit alarmed there!
The boat feels
completely inconsequential.
It just gets flung through,
and then it hits something,
and it's like hitting a brick wall.
What was that?
- Pretty rough, ain't it?
- It's amazing, a powerful stuff.
The stunning colours
of Australia
are most vivid
along the Kimberley Coastline.
Ochre sandstone cliffs,
red pindan sand
folding into the turquoise waters
of Broome's Roebuck Bay.
It's a unique setting.
But as Anthropologist
Dr Xanthe Mallet discovers,
seventy years ago,
this tranquil vista was shattered
when the war
spilled over to Australia.
By early 1942,
the Japanese were
pushing through Indonesia
or the Dutch East Indies
as it was known then.
In a rush to escape, Allied military
planes were commissioned
to evacuate Dutch refugees
from their colonial homes in Java.
A fleet of flying boats, Catalinas,
Dorniers and Short Empires
carrying families
and their few precious belongings
took flight for Australia's
main cities.
On the 2nd of March, they landed
in Broome's Roebuck Bay to refuel.
Given the area's large tidal movement
and the lack of facilities to ferry
more than a hundred refugees
to and from the small port town,
the passengers stayed
on board for the night.
At 9:20 AM the next morning,
nine Japanese Zeroes appeared
and couldn't believe their luck.
Before them,
15 flying boats lay at anchor
each with 30 or more Dutch refugees,
mostly women and children.
With no Allied resistance,
the Zeroes opened fire,
strafing the flying boats repeatedly
before turning to the airfield
and destroying
a further seven military aircraft.
In a vain attempt to save them,
parents threw their children
into the water
only to see it set alight
by burning fuel.
Many who didn't die in the attack,
were incinerated or drowned
as they attempted to swim
the kilometre back to shore.
It was a harrowing massacre
that lasted an hour,
but lingers on today
in the mudflats of Roebuck Bay.
And I'm going
to follow the tide out to see
the dramatic evidence for myself.
I'll be heading out with aviation
archaeologist, Dr Silvano Jung,
who's been studying Roebuck Bay's
unique maritime museum
for two decades.
They're the first aircraft wrecks
to be heritage-listed in Australia.
And they're only exposed at a king
low tide for a few days of the year.
So which one is this?
This is the X-23.
It was Sir Rudolf Idzerda's
Dornier flying boat.
There was only one person on board
at the time it was lost.
And he's still missing.
There are six exposed at low tide
and there's another nine
in deep water.
So nine you've never seen?
I've seen four of them
but there's still five missing.
So, this was more exposed?
Yeah, well it was exposed right down
to the keel...
- Was it?
- ...ten years ago.
Silvano has been
surveying the wreck site
and returns every ten years
to record the changes.
We're just gonna
take a photograph
of the bow section to show
the amount of sedimentation
over time.
- Yeah.
- Can you just set up this scale?
- Where do you want it?
- Just over here, I think.
- Right.
- On this side.
Why is it important to document it?
This is one of the most
significant sites in Australia.
There's like a battlefield here
so it's documenting rare flying boats
in a way that--
so they will--
We'll never see these aircraft again.
It's very important
that they remain in situ,
and it's the best conservation
measure, to do nothing.
- Yeah.
- In a way.
But it also feels more appropriate
that they stay here.
As there were no accurate
records of passenger numbers,
we'll never know exactly
how many people lost their lives
but Silvano estimates
more than a hundred.
Husbands, mothers and children...
Ghosts swirling in the eddies
of Roebuck Bay,
while the survivors
live with the memories
of war's deathly embrace.
With just 15,000 residents,
Broome is the Kimberley's big town.
It was built on pearling, a story
that can be told in two parts.
In the beginning
it was all about the shell.
I've come here to investigate
how the humble oyster
has come to define Broome
and its glittering place
in Australia's history.
By the turn of the 19th century,
this modest settlement
had global currency,
thanks to a coastline replete
with one of nature's
most beautiful shells.
This is Pinctada Maxima.
And it was buttons like this,
made from the mother of pearl
that made this material
so valuable in the 1800s.
But the Broome
pearling industry story
began much earlier than that.
Pearl oysters were noted here during
the voyage of the Beagle in 1839.
But it wasn't until the 1860s,
when colonists noticed
Aboriginal people
wearing and trading the distinctive
mother-of-pearl shell,
that the industry grew to supply
international demand for buttons,
knife handles
and fascias for wristwatches.
The settlers didn't just acknowledge
that ancient indigenous custom,
they enslaved Aborigines
and worked them ruthlessly
to harvest the shell in earnest.
This statue is a reminder
of the very worst form
of the exploitation.
It often involved kidnapping.
It almost always involved slavery.
Aboriginal girls were forced to dive
with no kit whatsoever,
naked and with no air supply.
Unbelievably,
it was often pregnant girls
because the belief
was that pregnant girls
had greater lung capacity
and so could hold
their breath for longer.
When slave trading,
or "blackbirding",
was outlawed in 1869,
Broome had to find others
to dive for shell.
In 1901, the White Australia Policy
restricted non-white immigration
but Broome, which, by 1910,
was the world's largest
pearl shell centre,
was given a special exemption.
Over the coming decades,
Asian and Islander immigrants
arrived to work in what was still
a very difficult business.
With a history of their own
in pearling,
Japanese divers were targeted
as the most skilled.
And so began
a long association with Broome.
Itsushi Shioji came here
as a deckhand in 1966.
How dangerous was it?
It was the vulcanised canvas suits
topped by copper helmets,
or "hard hats",
and lead-weighted boots,
introduced by the Japanese,
that assured their place
in the industry.
To get a wee taste
of all that hard history,
I'm going to try it on.
Looking at what's involved
in suiting up,
diving might have been the easy part.
Very natty Shetland wool stockings.
Shetland wool Jumper.
Made from fine Scottish
traveling rugs by the look of things.
This is how I dress at home you know.
Do you know what this is for?
I'll leave the rest
to your imagination.
I can promise you
there's not much to see.
These are all the rage
in Carnaby street at the moment.
This is a cushion to take the weight.
Feels great.
So if you imagine
that a typical Japanese diver
in real life in his vest and pants,
probably weighed about 60 kilos.
On the seabed
when he was fully togged up,
you can make that about 180 kilos,
lumbering about in all of this
for hours at a time.
The arrival of plastic buttons
soon after WWII
killed the pearl shell business.
But in the mid-1950s, the industry
was revitalised by cultured pearls
which is Broome's story today.
Under a cobalt sky
and above a sapphire sea,
it feels like I'm traveling
beyond the furthest reaches
of any known map.
I'm cruising through
the pristine waters
of the Buccaneer Archipelago,
off the tip of the Dampier Peninsula,
to find out how to grow or culture
a perfect pearl.
By the early 1900s,
Broome's pearl shell industry
was supplying 80 percent
of the world's demand
for buttons and textiles.
In 1946, a local man, Dean Brown,
decided to head further north
to wild, unchartered territory
in search of fresh beds
of the Kimberley's renowned
Pinctada Maxima shell.
Fortune favoured the brave.
The prize was abundant shell
in King Sound's sheltered waters,
shallow reefs and the protected
harbour of Cygnet Bay.
But Dean Brown was still in it
for shells not pearls,
as grandson James Brown tells me.
- How you doing?
- G'day, Neil.
He wouldn't have had the faintest
idea about cultured pearls.
It was a secret that was held by
the Japanese and only used in Japan.
And it wasn't until ten years later,
that that technology
started coming to Australia.
And how did he go
about making the transition then
from just harvesting
the natural shell
to thinking about setting up a farm?
He got the insight
when the Japanese
started running Kuri Bay
and that was
an American owned company.
My grandfather ended up
running the supplies up
- for that pearling company.
- Was that nearby?
It was about 200 kilometres
further up the coast.
He managed to convince my uncle
that it was a good idea
that he come up
and try some experiments.
And so, as a young 20-year-old,
my uncle did that
and miraculously succeeded
and to this day,
he's acknowledged as the first
non-Japanese person in the world
to figure out how to culture pearls
and then to do it commercially.
Three generations later,
and the Brown family
is still cultivating pearls
at Cygnet Bay,
the oldest pearl farm in Australia.
I think I imagined that the oysters
would just be left out here doing
whatever oysters do but it turns out,
they need regular maintenance.
The farm's 50,000 shells
are cleaned once a month
of marine weed and barnacles which
hamper the oysters' ability to feed.
Pinctada Maxima grows larger
than other pearl oyster species
which means
potentially bigger pearls.
The natural lives of these oysters
are heavily influenced by science.
Right, okay.
It's like a biology class.
Absolutely.
What would happen naturally,
in one of these big shells
if it was just living
its normal seabed life,
that would cause it to create a pearl
without any interference
from a farmer?
There's a range of things
that can do it,
but generally,
it's almost an immune response,
so something irritates it
and it can't get rid of it.
So like a grain of sand or whatever?
Or a little bit of a crab claw
might get in there,
or a worm might bore through
so the animal will start
laying nacre down around it.
So, wherever a little grain
of sand went in, say it landed there,
that mantle would start to lay down
more of this shiny shell around it
to make it smooth.
Yeah, you're absolutely right.
Culturing pearls means
that we introduce the irritant
into the oyster in the form of
a small ball shaped from shells,
which the oyster then coats
with its silvery white substance
called nacre to produce
a lustrous, round pearl.
Hopefully!
Okay, Neil. Are you ready
to harvest your first pearl?
- Okay.
- Take a seat.
Now, bring the shell up.
Put it on the stand.
Put that edge in.
Now I can't feel it.
- I've lost the baby's head!
- No.
Two years of hard work
by the oyster, and...
- Look at that
- JAMES: Well done.
That's like
a little bit of magic,
that's like
the most elaborately wrapped...
birthday present, ever.
Look! A little jewel of the sea.
After 50 years of trialling
and working,
this is what we've managed
to come up with.
Wow.
Right, okay. Now what is that?
That's the world's largest
fine quality round pearl.
22.2 millimetres.
Look at that. It's like Jupiter
compared to the Earth.
Yeah.
So how much is this one worth,
would you say?
That'd be worth
a couple hundred dollars
once it's set into a jewellery piece.
And the grand-daddy?
Well, that's possibly
a couple of million dollars.
My goodness.
Not bad for a mollusc.
Sharing the Dampier Peninsula,
just east of Cygnet Bay,
One Arm Point is home
to the saltwater Bardi people
of the Kimberley.
This is old Australia,
where tribal knowledge
has evolved from the natural cycles
of the earth, particularly the tide,
which has brought Brendan Moar here
to discover how people
used to get around,
before the arrival of boats
and outboard motors.
These waters are well known
for their huge tidal movements.
Tides up to 12 metres flow
through this bay every single day.
It's a fact that the traditional
owners of this land
acknowledge and respect.
The local Bardi people
used the power of the tides
to move around the coast.
I'm meeting Bardi tribesman,
Albert Wiggan,
who's going to show me
how they did that
and hopefully
catch some dinner, too!
Welcome, welcome to our country.
Thank you.
It is absolutely stunning.
This water is something else.
Well, this is One Arm Point,
you know?
This is the land of the Bardi people.
We're gonna go and make a raft
and finishing a raft
and I'll basically show you how,
in a traditional way,
the old people used to navigate,
you know, using the tides.
What inspired the Bardi people
to actually build the raft?
If you look just straight down here.
I mean, this is the foam.
The foam sort of inspired the idea
of the raft because it just...
floats on the surface, right?
There's no sort of restriction.
There's no sort of friction there
between the water movement underneath
and the raft itself,
because the raft is virtually
just gliding over the surface
of the water.
All right, Brendan.
Here's the other half, mate.
Right, so this is it.
Basically, this is what you've got,
right? This is the raft.
Tell me about the design.
It looks pretty simple,
but I'm sure that there's more
than meets the eye there.
Obviously,
it's about buoyancy, you know?
And obviously, the thicker areas
are going to be more buoyant
than obviously, the skinny part.
So, the principal is to combine
both skinny ends
so that the two fat ends
are floating. You know?
If we do see a crocodile or a shark,
do we have a safe word?
No. I'll just push you off.
As long as you know how to swim!
I'm just gonna get rid of this.
I reckon.
I'm not gonna have much use for that.
- Mate.
- Now I am a white dugong, right?
Yeah. Look, I reckon-- Yep.
You sit somewhere around here.
I'll get up the front
and we'll just see how we go.
Good luck? You know how to swim,
that's the main thing.
As long as you know
how to swim, mate.
Should it go down this much?
Not really.
You're right.
Like you said, you're
the white dugong, so you're right.
I am the big white dugong.
- All right. Let's go.
- What's the plan?
Where are we going and doing?
We're gonna head straight
over to that sand bar over there.
There's a nice little
fishing spot over there.
There's a fair distance
between here and there.
Yeah, it's a good workout, mate.
Keep you fit. Find half an hour
a day, they reckon.
It was designed purely
and simply because of the tides.
The main reason was,
obviously, transportation
but, obviously,
it became the main hunting tool.
The Bardi people have been
living in and around One Arm Point
since the last Ice age.
The sea has been central
to their lives
as a source of food
and spiritual significance.
And that's basically
why I build the raft, you know?
That's why I teach people
how to make spears and stuff,
and my children, you know?
Because I feel that's the legacy
that our elders pass onto
us young people, you know?
All this culture,
and it's just really...
It's all you really need, you know?
It's our identity.
I wouldn't sell it for the world.
If only I could stand here.
Paddle! Paddle boy!
Yeah, one of these fishes,
we're gonna catch some crocodiles.
So, like the foam
that inspired the idea
we've floated gently
over to a fishing spot
on the other side of the bay...
to spear ourselves some dinner.
Spending time
on the Dampier Peninsula,
you get that overwhelming sense
of just how beautiful
the Australian coastline can be.
How pristine it is
and how much of it
has this innate sense
of spirituality.
So much so, that this place
is truly timeless.
Well, there you go, mate.
That's dinner.
Can't get any more fresher than that.
I wanna know.
Is it just too good to be true?
Like how much of this life is left?
It's up to us as Indigenous
people, you know, how much is left.
And so, as long as there are people
like me who feel really strong
and proud about being,
you know, an Aboriginal.
As long as we are alive, I think
our culture will always stay alive.
A coast that glimmers
with beauty and spirit.
Two hundred and fifty kilometres
south-west of Broome,
another golden crescent
seemingly runs forever.
The splendid remoteness
of Eighty Mile Beach
is a haven for nature's migrants.
Marine Ecologist, Dr Emma Johnston
has travelled
to this newly declared marine park
to explore why this area
is a world-famous stomping ground
for some of the planet's
most adventurous travellers.
Every year, around half-a-million
migratory shorebirds
descend on Eighty Mile Beach
from their breeding grounds
in the Arctic Circle.
Amongst a variety of shore birds,
these great knots arrive here
in enormous
whimsical clouds every year
after an epic
8,000-kilometre journey.
Dr Jutta Leyrer is part
of the Global Flyway Network,
a scientific organisation
that studies the ecology
of migratory shorebirds.
They would have arrived here
in about October, November,
pretty much exhausted
after a long trip from Siberia.
They would have changed their
feathers. They're pretty much worn
after thousands of kilometres,
non-stop migration.
And then by sort of February,
they start to put on body mass again.
As a secluded marine reserve,
this is one of the world's
richest foraging grounds.
The birds feed undisturbed
along the vast tidal mudflats
on snails, crabs and worms.
Long thin bristle worms.
Socolicy, sort of made these tubes.
Now that is good bird food.
That definitely is good bird food.
How much do they need
to feed when they come here?
A lot. They basically
double their body weight
in three, to four, to five weeks.
Mudflats are ocean meadows
with invisible pastures.
Every day, the tide comes in
bringing nutrients that feed
tiny microscopic bacteria
and phytoplankton
on the surface of these sediments.
This is rich, nutritious food
for the invertebrates
that hide beneath.
So, this is a type of marine snail.
The snails are eating the bird poo.
The birds are eating the snails,
there's fish in the middle
and it's such a productive ecosystem.
Refreshed and replenished
by this abundant strip of coast,
come April, the flocks take flight
for their arduous journey north
to summer in Siberia.
I'm flying north too
but only a couple of hours
from Broome to a special place
a window to the Dreaming,
the sacred time
in Aboriginal culture,
when ancestral spirits created
the world and rhythms of life.
I'm heading to Freshwater Cove
to see some living history...
the extraordinary restoration
of some very old and sacred artwork.
I'm really privileged
to be welcomed into this country
by traditional custodian
and elder, Donny Woologoodja.
- Welcome to Freshwater Cove.
- Thanks very much.
It's called Freshwater Cove,
but what is this place called
in your language?
We're going
to a very significant place
along this dramatic coastline
where Donny has to perform
some special maintenance.
We're heading for Oombri,
or Raft Point.
I receive a ceremonial marking
which comes with a Dreamtime story
of two women
who collected some honey
while hunting.
And why does it go on my face
when I'm here?
Okay. Lead on.
And up we go, accompanied by nephew
and cultural apprentice, Callum,
along the red earth track.
The Timor Sea,
a shimmering backdrop...
and into a primeval art gallery.
- So, this is the place.
- Yeah.
- Oombri.
Look.
How long
have those paintings been there?
Maybe 50,000 years, maybe more.
What can you tell me
about these figures, Donny?
Who are they and what do they mean?
Is there one Wandjina or many?
So, all of these figures
are Wandjina.
Why are the Wandjina white?
So they're from the spirit world?
Yeah. The spirit world, yeah.
- And then there's obviously fish.
- Yeah, fish, yeah.
The faces are very, very simple.
It's just two eyes
and a stroke for a nose.
Right.
Following
in his father's footsteps,
Donny is a senior Worrorra,
tribal elder,
with a special responsibility
restoring the Wandjina artwork
to keep it vivid.
He paints with a profound
sense of respect for his ancestors.
And for me to witness this,
is a rare privilege indeed.
Art and spiritual conservation,
which Donny is training Callum
to assume in time.
First, he has to learn the stories
and then he can touch the art.
So, an important
part of the people
coming back to the country,
is to maintain...
- this.
- Yeah. Yeah.
You don't need anyone to tell
you that this is a special place.
It speaks for itself.
And then you find out that people
have been coming here for
50,000 years. In fact,
for heaven knows how long.
And there's definitely a comfort
about realising you're just one
of a long, long line of people
who've sat in here
and looked out at the coast.
To end what has been
a spectacular day
in this beautiful wilderness,
of Wijingarra Budd Budd,
I must undergo a farewell ritual.
What does the smoke do?
Of what?
- Of the spirits in the cave?
- Yeah.
So, what would happen
if I wasn't smoked?
- The spirits?
- Yeah.
Right, let's get in the smoke!
Do I just step into it?
Your foot.
Your hands. Hands.
Your head. And you smoke the smoke.
Then you go... And this one.
The Wandjina
of Freshwater Cove left their images
on the cave walls before
they returned to the spirit world.
And it's the responsibility
of the living,
Donny, after his father Sam,
to repaint and maintain those images.
I've just been cleansed
to make sure I don't take
any of the spirits with me when I go.
And I'm glad about that,
because enough people
have left here over the years,
and I like the idea
of leaving the spirits behind here
where they and the people belong.
# Home sweet home
Home sweet home
Wijingarra Budd Budd
# Home sweet home
Home sweet home
Wijingarra Budd Budd #
It's been an incredible
journey through the colours
and eternal landscapes
of the Kimberley.
Australia's last great wilderness.
The Kimberley
is a region of extremes.
Extreme temperatures,
extreme humidity, even extreme tides.
It's not for the faint-hearted.
For some, though,
any hardships or challenges
are outweighed by the rewards.
For me, it's definitely a place
best suited
to those who've adapted to survive.
Next time,
from remote to radiant.
The Coast team explores
stunning Sydney Harbour.
City built on blood sweat,
tears of convicts and oyster shells.
There was to be no escape.
Or was there?
Ready, aim, fire!
What a place to be quarantined.
Feels more like Saint Tropez.
Look at this underwater garden.
This little bit there...
That can be Sydney.
Those stories and more from Sydney.
Another day in paradise.